# ECE 2029 - INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL CIRCUIT DESIGN
### Prof. Maqsood Ali Mughal

Digital circuits are the foundation upon which the computers, cell phones, and calculators we use every day are built. This course explores these foundations by using modern digital design techniques to design, implement and test digital circuits ranging in complexity from basic logic gates to state machines that perform useful functions like calculations, counting, timing, and a host of other applications. Students will learn modern design techniques, using a hardware description language (HDL) such as Verilog to design, simulate and implement logic systems consisting of basic gates, adders, multiplexers, latches, and counters. The function and operation of programmable logic devices, such as field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), will be described and discussed in terms of how an HDL logic design is mapped and implemented. Experiments involving the design of combinational and sequential circuits will provide students a hands-on introduction to basic digital electrical engineering concepts and the skills needed to gain more advanced skills. In the laboratory, students will construct, troubleshoot, and test the digital circuits that they have developed using a hardware description language. These custom logic designs will be implemented using FPGAs and validated using test equipment. Topics: Number representations, Boolean algebra, design and simplification of combinational circuits, arithmetic circuits, analysis and design of sequential circuits, and synchronous state machines. Lab exercises: Design, analysis and construction of combinational and sequential circuits; use of hardware description languages to implement, test, and verify digital circuits; function and operation of FPGAs. Recommended background: Introductory Electrical and Computer Engineering concepts covered in a course such as ECE 2010 or RBE 1001, and MA 1022. Note: Students will not be able to receive credit for both ECE 2022 and ECE 2029.
